---
layout: post
title:  "xchg rax, rax – 0x02"
date:   2016-03-16 12:00:00 -0400
categories: xchg-rax-rax
---

<aside>
This post is a continuation of the series xchg rax,rax.
For background, see the beginning of the series.
</aside>

Moving on to [0x02][1], we have another short but more subtle program:

{% highlight asm %}
neg      rax
sbb      rax,rax
neg      rax
{% endhighlight %}

We have two unique instructions, all dealing directly with the rax register.

Starting with neg, this is a two's complement negation. It's functionally
equivalent to subtracting the value from zero. It also sets the cf flag (carry
flag) if the source is zero to zero, otherwise it sets cf to one.

<!--break-->

sbb is the next instruction, or subtraction with borrow. The Intel Instruction
Reference has a good description of this, *"Adds the source operand (second
operand) and the carry (CF) flag, and subtracts the result from the destination
operand (first operand). The result of the subtraction is stored in the
destination operand. The destination operand can be a register or a memory
location; the source operand can be an immediate, a register, or a memory
location. (However, two memory operands cannot be used in one instruction.) 
The state of the CF flag represents a borrow from a previous subtraction."*

Let's start by observing the affect of just the first two instructions and see
how they work. We know from the descriptions of neg that we can expect different
behaviors whether or not rax is zero, so let's try it with one and zero and see
what the results are.

<pre>
Initial:
rax = 0x0000000000000000
rflags = 0x0000000000000202 (CF = 0)

Step (neg):
rax = 0x0000000000000000
rflags = 0x0000000000000246 (CF = 0)

Step (sbb):
rax = 0x0000000000000000
rflags = 0x0000000000000246 (CF = 0)
</pre>

And let's try it when rax is 1:

<pre>
Initial:
rax = 0x0000000000000001
rflags = 0x0000000000000202 (CF = 0)

Step (neg):
rax = 0xffffffffffffffff
rflags = 0x0000000000000297 (CF = 1)

Step (sbb):
rax = 0xffffffffffffffff
rflags = 0x0000000000000297 (CF = 1)
</pre>

**Tip:** You can use print/t $rflags to see the individual flags in LLDB. We know
that the Carry Flag is bit zero.

rax is zero, and negating zero is zero again, so zero gets set in the
destination. We can also see that CF is set to zero. Next is sbb. It adds the
source (rax) and the carry flag. Zero plus zero is zero, then zero is subtracted
from zero and stored in rax, which is zero.

A whole lot of zeros.

Now for the second example. We start with 1 and negate it, so -1. In two's
complement that's 0xffffffffffffffff. We also see that the CF is set to 1. Next
for sbb, we add -1 and the CF flag, so, back to zero. But we haven't done the
subtraction yet. So subtract zero from -1, and we are still left with -1, which
is what we see in rax.

OK, but we still have a final neg left. We can easily determine that the
negative of zero is zero for the second example, -1 negated is back to 1.

In both cases, we end up right back to where we started. Doesn't seem
spectacularly interesting. Let's try a random-ish value for rax, like 89.

<pre>
Initial:
rax = 0x0000000000000059
rflags = 0x0000000000000202 (CF = 0)

Step (neg):
rax = 0xffffffffffffffa7
rflags = 0x0000000000000293 (CF = 1)

Step (sbb):
rax = 0xffffffffffffffff
rflags = 0x0000000000000297 (CF = 1)
</pre>

This one is more interesting. We take 89 and negate it, giving is -89. CF gets
set to 1. Next for sbb, we take -89 and add CF, which gives us -88. The
destination operand is -89 still, so <code>-89 - (-88)</code> is -1.

The final instruction negates that back to 1.

Turns out it behaves that way for all values other than zero because of the way
neg behaves with regard to the carry flag.

So what is the purpose of this then? It's a branchless, simple way of setting
something to 1 for any value other than zero. It doesn't seem like much, but
it's clever. In pseudo code, it might look something like this:


<pre>
if (value != 0) then
    value = 1
else
    value = 0
</pre>

But as the code shows, it does this all without branching. Very clever.

[1]: http://xorpd.net/pages/xchg_rax/snip_02.html